[MUSIC]
>> Jafar Husain: What is definitely
not coming in JavaScript 6,
is a special syntax for
creating an observable.
I am going to invent a special syntax for
creating an observable, just like we have
a special syntax for creating
an array with the square brackets.
Let's imagine,
we have a special syntax for
creating observables which
are collections that arrive over time.
The only reason I'm gonna invent that, so
it's easier to understand how observables
work and how the functions that
we're gonna be learning about,
map, filter, and
all transform observables.
So definitely not coming in JavaScript 6,
I've just invented it for
this particular presentation.
But this is the syntax that I'm gonna use
for a collection that arise over time.
We're gonna imagine that we have a future
version of the JavaScript language, and
we can invoke methods on this literal for
describing an observable, okay.
So let's say I have this observable,
imagine each one of these dots is like
10 milliseconds for example, right.
And so if you were two forEach over this
observable, you would immediately get
called with 1, and then a little
bit later I push 2 to you, and
then a little bit later I push 3 through
to you and then I'd say onCompleted.
Does that makes sense?.
That's the callbacks that you would see.
So let's see what happens
when I call forEach on this.
In real life, the observer
you're gonna be learning about,
has the forEach method which we saw to
find earlier on mouse moves, right.
Does this exact same thing as you would
expect when you did it over array.
The only difference is, it takes time.
It arrives over time.
Remember when we did this for example with
an array, it finished almost instantly.
And now it's actually just whenever the
data comes in from the underlying source.
Then it gets translated and
then immediately handed off.
Question in the back.
>> Speaker 2: They're asking about
it every forEach call is returning
a different dispose object?
>> Jafar Husain: Yes.
>> Speaker 2: How do we hold
all of them and use them?
>> Jafar Husain: Well, we call forEach
right, you're gonna get multiple values,
and again, that shouldn't be too hard to
think about because it's just the same as
addEventListener or removeEventListener.
When you call addEventListener,
you have to remember to hold on to the
handler because that handler is the same
handler you have to pass back when
you call removeEventListener.
Here it's no different.
Instead of holding on to a handler,
you have to hold on to
the subscription object.
So when you call forEach,
you're gonna get many, many values.
And at some point you may decide you
don't want those values anymore and
you have to call subscription.suppose.
That's no harder than calling
remove event listener and
passing in the same handler
you're holding on to before.
So one shouldn't be any more
complex than the other, all right?
Same complexity for-
>> Speaker 2: I
think they might have been thinking about,
so, every object that comes back,
the dispose will just turn off
the whole subscription, right?
>> Jafar Husain: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Jafar Husain: Yeah, so
you're not gonna get any more data.
So here's what happens when you
call forEach over an observable.
Remember map?
Map applies a function to
every item in a collection and
creates a new collection containing
all of the transformed results.
That was true of an array and
it's true over an observable.
If we call map over an array.
What we get is an observable
that pumps us out each value but
first transforms it through the function.
So we take one 1,2, 3 and we apply
a function that adds 1 to each item and
we get 2, 3, 4, but
notice it arrives over time.
As soon as one comes along,
an observable doesn't hold on to data.
As soon as a value comes along,
it's gonna immediately transform it and
then send it along.
We don't collect up data in the memory,
as soon as data arrives, we translate it
by throwing through that function and
then we hand it off like a hot potato.
That makes sense?
So we mapping.
Now, let's try filtering.
Imagine, same thing as before.
We're gonna filter, we're gonna take
the observable and we call filter on it.
We create a new observable
that contains only those
items that pass the test function.
And so we took an observed look and
then 1, 2, 3 and
we got an observable that came 2, 3.
Yep?
>> Speaker 3: Should that plus be
a greater than?
>> Jafar Husain: Yes it should.
Thank you.
[LAUGH] Live code reviews.
Sorry.
Yeah.
Question in the back.
>> Speaker 2: Does forEach take this arg,
should I even worry about it?
>> Jafar Husain: forEach
does take this arg.
Probably not a super important
point at the moment, but
yes it has the same interface
as the array forEach.
Yeah.
>> Speaker 4: So,
map was returning an array, right?
And now it's returning singular elements,
or-
>> Jafar Husain: So, sorry,
this slide can be a little confusing.
What's actually happening
here is I'm shortening
the slide from this to this.
So, I'm creating a new array but
I'm also calling forEach on it so
that you see the values
that come out inside of it.
So in this case I'm actually creating
an observable and we call map.
All you've done is
create a new observable.
And then the forEach in here,
it's kind of implicit.
I'm just putting in a forEach to show
you what would come out of the console
if you were to subscribe
to that observable.
But that's a good question.
>> Speaker 4: And that's why at
the beginning that's where you're running
the concat all because we
have all these mini arrays.
>> Jafar Husain: Yeah, we have a bunch of
mini arrays which we don't wanna print
that out to the console, right.
>> Speaker 4: You're clever.
Okay, l'm with you.
>> Jafar Husain: So I don't wanna cheat,
so I'm gonna put that in here.
So we can all see what's going on.
I might go off the slide a little bit.
>> Jafar Husain: So
let's take another look at that, right?
So .map actually just
returns an observable.
And so when we see stuff
printed out of the console,
it's because we're .forEach-ing
over that observable.
So we get 2, 3, and then eventually 4.
Right, because that's how long it
takes for the items to arrive.
And as soon as the items arrive, they're
translated and then they're forwarded on.
Hot Potato.
Same thing with filter,
we're gonna get 2 or 3.
We skip over the first element,
we never return it because it's 1.
And now I want to call your
attention to concatAll.
So this is over arrays, you remember
how concatAll works over arrays, right.
Now how many different ways really is
there to flatten a two-dimensional array.
I suggest there's really
only one sane way to do it,
which is to start with the first array,
go through all those elements,
move to the next array, go through all
those elements, move to the last array,
eventually go through all those elements
and then put all of that into a new array.
And that's effectively
what concatAll does.
It starts top to bottom and
goes left to right.
So it goes top to bottom left to right.
So here, this example, we get 2, 3.
Excuse me.
We get 2, 3, 4.
1, 2, 3, 4.
That's the only way that you can
flatten the two dimensional array.
It's only way that make sense.
Here's where things get more complicated.
An Observable is in
a collection over time.
And it turns out that if you have a
collection, an Observable of Observables,
there's more than one way to flatten it.
Because the items arrive over time.
And there's three strategies.
In fact, you can solve almost every
asynchronous concurrency problem
where you've got more than
one thing going at once?
Almost every concurrency problem that
you're gonna run into the UI with
three basic flattening strategies for
an observable of observables.
So it's really key that you
just get these three down.
And you'll start to see that many,
many problems that look brand new are very
different, can actually be classified into
one of these three flattening strategies.
So we have concatAll.
So what does that mean
when applied to an array?
Or excuse me, what does that mean when we
apply to an observable of observables.
So what this is, is an observable where
if you're foreached over the outer
observable, a certain amount of time would
go by, and then eventually you get another
observable and
presumably you'd foreach over that, right.
But in the meantime the outer observable
could give you another observable while
you're still not completed with that
observable that you've just got, right.
Because the observable happens over time.
And so you have this potential for
concurrency now because in an observable
of observables,
you've got this new dimension of time.
Which we didn't have on array, right.
All the data is there
instantly at the same time.
So with an array we just exhaust
things top to bottom, left to right.
So here's what concatAll does,
the concatAll strategy would do
when applied to an observable.
So let's say I foreach over
the outer observable here.
The observable of observables.
First, I would get an observable.
In this case,
let's just say just contains one.
And then I'm immediately
gonna foreach over that.
And then what we do is we take the data,
and we put it into the flattened stream.
So we see 1 appear immediately.
So now it's completed and
just as it completes.
The outer observable gives
me another observable.
This one contains 2 and 3.
And so I immediately forEach over that,
that inner observable.
2 pops out, I immediately push
that out into the output stream,
nice, flat output stream
that comes out of concatAll.
Now while I'm waiting for
that second observable to complete,
the outer observable throws
me another observable.
This one's empty.
So what concatALL does, is one thing is,
I could begin forEach-ing over
this observable immediately.
But I don't.
The what distinguishes concatAll
from the other strategies.
Is it always make sure that
elements come out in the order
of it that the collection that
they were inside of arrived.
So here I really wanna see 1, 2, 3, 4.
So we're not actually gonna
forEach over this observable.
Yet I'm just gonna put it away, I'm gonna
hold on to it but I'm not gonna call for
each on it.
Does that makes sense?
So now I'm still just waiting for
3 to arrive and while I'm waiting for
3 to arrive, that second observable to
complete, another observable comes to me.
Once again I'm not gonna forEach over it,
I'm just gonna put it aside.
The key thing to understand is,
in this particular example, all of these
observables do not start emitting
values until you for Each over them.
Does that make sense?
All of these observables do not start
emitting their values until you
forEach over them.
So if I don't call forEach on these
observables, data is not gonna come out.
Now not all observables behave that way.
It's possible that you could have
an observable that is emitting values,
regardless of whether you
are calling forEach over it or not.
Can anybody think of a like a data
stream that will emit values.
And if you don't start listening to it,
soon enough, you might miss some values.
We showed you one earlier, mouse moves.
Right, let's say I'm
moving my mouse around and
you haven't hooked up an event listener.
You're not gonna get those event objects,
right.
You've missed them effectively.
You only start getting those event
objects when you add your event listener.
We call that a hot observable.
It's a hot data source.
It's going whether you're listening or
not.
What I'm showing you in these slides
is an example of a cold observable.
A cold observable will not do anything
until somebody calls forEach on it,
it will not do a single thing.
And so the data inside of these
observables is not gonna come out until I
call forEach on this.
So all these slides use cold observables.
So that's why, even though the time has
passed where I could have emitted 2, or
excuse me, I could have emitted 4 here.
It hasn't been emitted yet
because I haven't called forEach on it.
So now I'm still waiting on that
second observable to complete.
And then I actually got two
observables in a buffer somewhere but
I haven't called forEach on yet,
does that makes sense?
It's that third and fourth observable.
Now finally that second observable
completes give me 3 and completes, and
says on completed.
So on next 3, on completed.
Now I immediately subscribe to that
third observable that I've been keeping
over here in a buffer somewhere.
What happens to this empty collection in
the middle of the flattening operation?
What happens to empty collections
when they get flattened?
They disappear because
there is nothing returned.
Yeah?
>> Speaker 5: We know it stays empty
because it's already fired into
onCompleted.
>> Jafar Husain: I guess,
if you forEach over an empty collection,
the only thing will happen
is it fires onCompleted.
That's how we know it's empty.
Yeah, question in the back.
>> Speaker 2: Question, yep,
in the empty array, 5 was in there,
that wouldn't happen until after the 3.
>> Jafar Husain: That's correct, yes.
So if instead of an empty array.
There was like 5, you would end up,
the outputted collection would be 1,
2, 3, 5, 4.
Because it always returns
elements in the order
based on the collection that
they're inside of arrives.
So, basically what you need to know
about observable concatAll is it behaves
exactly the same as array concatAll.
It goes top to bottom, left to right.
So here in this case, we're gonna
subscribe to this observable and
basically it's like a no-op,
nothing happens,
because all empty collections, just when
they get flattened they just disappear.
Now after we get the onCompleted
message from the empty collection.
We forEach over this other collection
that we've been keeping to the side and
it calls onNext gives us 4, and
then immediately calls onCompleted.
And so we return 4.
Notice what happens with concatAll,
the output stream ends up
kind of getting elongated.
It's longer than any of the input streams,
right, because
we basically have to make sure to enforce
that things come out in the right order.
And that means we need to buffer things,
right, buffer observables, and
make sure to only forEach over them when
the previous observables have completed.